Add usage of SCONE for throughput advice outside of rate-limiting (#31)
ietf-wg-scone/scone: draft-thoji-scone-protocol.md

--- abstract

> On-path network elements can sometimes be configured to apply rate limits to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes a protocol where on-path network elements
can give endpoints their perspective on what the maximum achievable
throughput might be for QUIC flows.
```

This can be shorter, and I think we don't need to get into what might cause a network element to offer this advice, rather we just need to establish that network elements have a perspective and that that perspective might be useful to communicate.

> flows that pass them. Access networks and their attached devices may also
> experience volatile conditions that affect the sustainable network throughput. 
> 
> This document describes a method for signaling to
> endpoints that rate limiting policies are in force and what that rate limit is,
> and for non-rate limiting networks to signal throughput advice based on network
> conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

See above.

--- middle

# Introduction

Many access networks apply rate limits to constrain the data rate of attached
devices. This is often done without any indication to the applications
running on devices.  The result can be that application performance is degraded,
as the manner in which rate limits are enforced can be incompatible with the
rate estimation or congestion control algorithms used at endpoints.

Having the network indicate what its rate limiting policy is, in a way that is
accessible to endpoints, allows applications to use this information when
adapting their send rate.

> In addition, access networks without rate limiting policies may also provide 
> information to endpoints that can help account for connection state, such as 
> network congestion, volatile signal strength, or radio bearers with constrained
> bandwidth.

Reviewer: I would instead say this:

```suggestion
Network elements are not limited to communicating information
about rate limiting policies.
Network elements in access networks could provide information
to endpoints that can help account for changes in network capacity
that are not suited to congestion control feedback. This might include
reduced capacity due to overuse, equipment faults, or other transient issues; 
conversely, networks might choose to signal increased availability of capacity.
```

Author: Thanks, that suggestion covers the motive for the PR in one paragraph :)

The protocol requires that packets are modified as they transit a
network element, which provides endpoints strong evidence that the network
element has the power to apply rate limiting; though see {{security}} for
potential limitations on this.

The throughput advice signal that this protocol carries is independent of congestion
signals, limited to a single path and UDP packet flow, unidirectional, and
strictly advisory.

## Independent of Congestion Signals

> throughput advice signals are not a substitute for congestion feedback.  Congestion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughput advice signals are not a substitute for congestion feedback.  Congestion
```

signals, such as acknowledgments, provide information on loss, delay, or ECN

> markings {{?ECN=RFC3168}} that suggest the real-time condition of a network

Author: ```suggestion
markings {{?ECN=RFC3168}} that indicate the real-time condition of a network
```

> markings {{?ECN=RFC3168}} that suggest the real-time condition of a network

Author: ```suggestion
markings {{?ECN=RFC3168}} that indicate the real-time condition of a network
```

Author: Reverted to 'indicate'

> path.  Congestion signals might suggest a throughput that is different from the

Reviewer: I think we need a better word than "suggest" for CC signals.

Author: Reverted to 'indicate'

> path.  Congestion signals might suggest a throughput that is different from the

Author: ```suggestion
path.  Congestion signals might indicate a throughput that is different from the
```

## Unspecified Scope

Modifying a packet does not prove that the throughput that is indicated would be
achievable.  A signal that is sent for a specific flow is likely enforced at a
different scope.  The extent of that scope is not carried in the signal.

For instance, limits might apply at a network subscription level, such
that multiple flows receive the same signal.

Endpoints can therefore be more confident in the throughput signal as an
indication of the maximum achievable throughput than as any indication of
expected throughput.  Where the throughput signal simply represents a rate
limit, then the advised throughput will only be achievable on an uncongested network.
Whereas a throughput signal calculated by a non rate-limiting network should be 
based on current network and attached device signal conditions, and hence account for

> any network congestion.

Reviewer: I don't like this one.  The idea that this mechanism is good for congestion feedback is not something that has broad support.  That's why ECN or similar mechanisms are for.

Author: Reverted (except I have kept 'throughput' in place of the original 'rate limit')

> expected throughput.  Where the throughput signal simply represents a rate
> limit, then the advised throughput will only be achievable on an uncongested network.
> Whereas a throughput signal calculated by a non rate-limiting network should be 
> based on current network and attached device signal conditions, and hence account for
> any network congestion.

Author: ```suggestion
expected throughput.  That throughput will only be achievable when there is no
significant data flowing in the same scope.  In the presence of other flows,
congestion limits are likely to determine actual throughput.
```

> 

Author: > This is a true statement. What's the rationale for removing it?

Quite probably my misunderstanding - but my rationale is that  capacity will always be split between multiple active flows in a best effort access network. I'm also not clear why downlink is specified but not uplink..?

> 

Reviewer 2: I think the statement is suggesting that at the very last mile, it is likely that there is only one active connection at a time. I think that is true and relevant here.

> 

Reviewer 3: The typical case that causes swearing at throughput is the adult watching TV and the teenager turning on his video game; the adult complains that the news is showing a spinner mid-stream; the teenager complains that his controller is sluggish. Multiple flows at the last mile are normal, expected, and should be engineered for.

> 

Author: Reverted, but I will raise another PR with suggested rewording

> 

Reviewer: @alvestrand, that's what a congestion controller ultimately has to be used for.  The design here doesn't address that case, except to the extent that the sluggish game might fit between the rate limit cap and the capacity that the video uses.

Looking forward to what @Kevsy suggests here.

SCONE, it might switch to applying its policies for non-SCONE flows, using
congestion control signals.

The time and scope over which throughput advice applies is not specified.  The
effective throughput advice might change without being signaled.  The signaled
advice can be assumed to apply to the flow of packets on the same UDP address 
tuple for the duration of that flow.  For rate limiting networks, rate limiting
policies often apply on the level of a device or subscription, but endpoints

> cannot assume that this is the case.  A separate signal can be sent for each flow.

Reviewer: The tentative position thus far is that we will be specifying a time period, even if we do not define a scope.  I'd rather not touch this text just now if it is changing.

Author: > +1. This PR should be limited to replacing "rate limit" by "Throughput advice".

I think it can also include Martin's text that says rate limiting is not the only use (line 83-86 in the PR), and together those would cover my motive for raising the PR

Reviewer: I'm OK with this generally now.  However, this no longer makes sense as a statement:

> The effective throughput advice might change without being signaled.

Should we drop that line?  Or is there a different statement for this?  I'm leaning toward cutting it.

Reviewer 2: Isn't it still the case that when the advice changes while the endpoints is in quiescence, the endpoints would end up sending data without being signaled?

Reviewer 4: > would removing 'advice' here cover it, i.e. 'The effective throughput might change without being signaled'?
To me that misses the quiescence point that @kazuho makes, since "effective throughput" sounds like something active that you measure.

Perhaps rephrasing it to something like:

“Network conditions and rate-limit policies can change in ways that make previously signaled advice obsolete, and there are no guarantees that updated advice will be sent.”

({{apply}}) according to their policies.

> ## Applying throughput advice signals {#apply}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Applying Throughput Advice Signals {#apply}
```

*  Graceful handling of network elements that might only recognize one version.

> ## Providing Opportunities to Apply throughput advice signals {#extra-packets}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Providing Opportunities to Apply Throughput Advice Signals {#extra-packets}
```

SCONE packets could be stripped from datagrams in the network, which cannot be
reliably detected.  This could result in a sender falsely believing that no
network element applied a throughput advice signal.

## Interactions with congestion control

SCONE and congestion control both provide the application with estimates
of a path capacity. They are complementary. Congestion control algorithms
are typically designed to quickly detect and react to congestion, i.e., to
the "minimum" capacity of a path. SCONE informs the endpoint
of the maximum capacity of a path based on network rate limit policy,

> network conditions, or a comination of the two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
network conditions, or a combination of the two.
```

# Security Considerations {#security}

The modification of packets provides endpoints proof that a network element is

> in a position to drop datagrams and may be applying a rate limit policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a position to drop datagrams and could apply a rate limit policy.
```
